REVIEW ON INDIA’S BABY CARE MARKET
Nisha Nandal
Research Scholar. Ansal University, Gurugram, India
Dr. Ritika Malik 
Management Consultant and Visiting Professor, India
Dr. Naveen Nandal
Assistant Professor, Ansal University, Gurugram, India

Now a days market is more shopper oriented and all activities of business rotate 
around the Customers in order to satisfy them by fulfilling their needs via effective 
service. The quality products of baby are found to be expensive and companies are 
always looking to develop the most cutting edge products. The main concern of the 
parents is to have best products for their child in order to keep safe and sound. Parents just not but the product easily by believing on the advertisement, they do
research on the Internet by viewing product websites, consumer reports, blogs etc.
and then make a decision, but the one which suits him the best. Increasing level of
income, availability of better products and rising awareness have meaningfully
altered the child care products industry landscape. In field of baby care product, India
is found to be most preferred destination for marketers and manufacturers. The segment which is rising at a fast pace in India is Baby care market. The usage & amount
of child care products has almost double in India in last few years. The factors which are 
nurturing the progress of the segment are vast population of India, increasing birth rate & 
literacy rate, enhanced purchasing power and urbanisation of the rural population. Parents
now a day no more get appealed by the fancy advertisement, they make their purchasing
decisions after investigating on Internet, taking reference from friends and reading customer 
reviews etc. New parents are also tremendously concerned about their child's safety. It is verydifficult to gain the belief of a customer in today's market. Additionally, awareness of toxins
and their harmful effects on babies has led to an increase in negativity in the industry against
the giants. Educated mothers see only harmless choices for their children, and that has opened
up an ocean of opportunities for innovative goods on the childcare market. Franchising or 
distribution has witnessed a spurt in the baby care products market. Baby care segment is one 
of the lonely industries that has seen an advanced number of repeat purchases, with repeat
buyers accounting for more than 50 percent of shoppers. 






Child Care Decision-Making Literature Review 
Authors: Nicole Forry, Child Trends
 
Kathryn Tout, Child Trends
 
Laura Rothenberg, Child Trends
 
Heather Sandstrom, The Urban Institute 
Colleen Vesely, George Mason University 
The purpose of this review is to summarize research on the context and factors that facilitate parents’ decisionmaking
about child care. It is intended to provide a foundation of empirical knowledge for state administrators, 
early childhood program developers, and policymakers who can use information about child care decisionmaking
processes and outcomes to improve their programs and services for families. The review reflects 
current and seminal work completed by researchers throughout the U.S. on the preferences, constraints and 
supports that influence parents’ child care decision-making. Literature for this review comes from published 
journal articles as well as reports from studies funded by the Office of Planning, Research, and Evaluation and 
other federal government agencies. The structure and content were selected to reflect topics of interest to 
early care and education administrators, policymakers, and stakeholders. 
We use a child care decision-making model developed by Weber (2011) and policy-relevant issues identified 
in discussions with state administrators to frame the review. Additionally, we focus on literature related to 
the child care decisions of parents with young children (age 0-5). Findings from the literature are organized 
into four main sections reflecting empirical findings about: 1) parents’ child care decision-making processes, 
2) parents’ preferences and priorities in selecting a care arrangement, 3) constraints to selecting preferred 
care arrangements, and 4) policies and programs that support parents in selecting their preferred care 
arrangement. Key findings from each of these sections are provided below. Further details and citations can be 
found in the full literature review. 
Key Findings 











A Review of the Literature 
on Access to High-Quality 
Care for Infants and Toddlers
Patti Banghart, Tamara Halle, Tiffany Bamdad, 
Maya Cook, Zakia Redd, Alexandra Cox, and 
Julianna Carlso

Purpose of the Literature Review 
Children experience the most rapid rate of development during the first three years of life (Center on the 
Developing Child, 2017). It is well understood that high-quality learning experiences that begin early in life 
can promote young children’s development and help reduce achievement gaps (Camilli et al., 2010; 
Duncan & Magnuson, 2013). However, much of the literature has focused on child outcomes related to 
attendance in early care and education (ECE) programs for preschool-age children; and less is known about 
how high-quality child care contributes to infant and toddler development. In addition, families’ ability to 
access high-quality child care for infants and toddlers needs to be better understood.
Recent federal policy and program initiatives have provided states with opportunities to expand highquality
care for infants and toddlers. For instance, when the Child Care and Development Block Grant 
(CCDBG) was reauthorized in 2014, it encouraged states to increase access to child care for infants and 
toddlers. The grant also raised the amount of the infant and toddler set-aside funds that states must spend 
on increasing quality for infant and toddler care using their CCDBG funds (Administration for Children and 
Families, 2014). Furthermore, in 2014, federal funding for Early Head Start–Child Care Partnership grants 
was awarded to help expand high-quality care for infants and toddlers from low-income families. As 
federal and state initiatives begin to address the needs for access to high-quality infant and toddler care, it 
is important to understand the factors that facilitate families’ access to care and the practices that 
strengthen the quality of care for infants and toddlers.
The purpose of this literature review is to review the research on supporting access to quality infant and 
toddler care and the effectiveness of approaches to improve access to and the quality of infant and 
toddler ECE. The review focuses on research conducted between 2008 and 2018 and addresses the 
following questions: 
• What factors facilitate or hinder families’ access to high-quality care for infants and toddlers?
• What factors contribute to strengthening quality in child care for infants and toddlers and lead to
positive outcomes for children under age three?
Throughout the review we assume that access to and quality of infant and toddler care are inherently 
related. The access section of this review addresses supports for accessing quality care. However, it is 
difficult to conceptualize how to support access to high-quality care without also examining supports for 
strengthening the quality of care. Thus, this review focuses on both access and quality; the more the field 
understands about how to improve the quality of infant and toddler care and implements effective 
approaches for improving quality, the more accessible that care will be for the families that need it. 





Literature Review
on
Child Health
Dr. Fehmida Jalil
September 1997
About the Author:
Fahmida Jalil
MBBS, DCB, Doctrate in Medicine, FCPS, PhD.
Forrner Professor and head ofthe Depa.rtriient ofSocial and Preventive Pediatrics, King Edward
Medical College. ChairpersonBreast-feeding Steering Committee, Punjab. She is Member board
ofTrustee ICDDRB, Dhaka. Her interests include activitiesrelated to safe motherhood and child
survival; nutrition and post-graduatemedical education. She hasl79-publications in National and
International Journals.

Practices Related to Young Child Feeding
A rich body ofdata has been generated on breast-feeding practices since the early 1980s.
However, due to a lack of a precise definition ofthe various components of "Optimal breastfeeding",
the- data from earlier studies was not comparable'. To introduce uniformity of
understanding, the definitions were clearly spelled out at Innocent in the late 1980s. This report
extends over three time periods: 1984 - 1990, 1991 -93, and 1994 -1996. An effort is made here
to weigh the knowledge of communities, as well as that of health providers (mostly through
qualitative data) against the current breast-feeding practices for the corresponding time period.
As much data as possible, is included in this report. In compiling this report. we have taken into
consideration that some data might have escaped our attention, but most of the indigenous
studies, reports, and reviews, which have a bearing on the subject have been incorporated.
"Breastfeeding" was used as,a loose term during-the 1980s. It included totally breast fed.
and partially breast fed with formula, fresh milk, or water as supplements. The concept of
"exclusive" breast feeding was not clear at this time. Nagra et aF from Faisalabad have shown
that 63% ofthe mothers in the high socio-economic strata, and 68% in the low-income group
were exclusively breastfeeding. Women working in agricultural fields had a higher rate ofbreast
feeding than those working in offices. The primary reason for this in urban areas was that
women had return to work, there was insufficient milk, repeated pregnancies, and an underlying
concern about hygiene3• The cohort study from Lahore by Ashraf et al showed that exclusive
breast feeding was uncommon (here exclusive breast feeding means that infants were fed
nothing else but that the breast milk al0!1~)' Only 9 % of the babies were exclusively
breastfeeding at one month ofage, with a rapid decline during the first three months4
• In a study
by the GoP, 59.6% ofnewborns in rural, and 69% in urban areas were exclusively breast fed till
the age of 5.6 months5•







